# How Strings Work in C++ (and how to use them)

This chapter covers the contents of the depending [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ijIxcB9qjaU&list=PLlrATfBNZ98dudnM48yfGUldqGD0S4FFb&index=31).

## Table of Contents
  - [Related Videos](#related-videos)
  - [Notes](#notes)
  - [Characters (Chars)](#characters-chars)
    - [Different UTF encodings](#different-utf-encodings)
  - [How Strings work basically](#how-strings-work-basically)
    - [String declaration without library](#string-declaration-without-library)
    - [Manual string declaration](#manual-string-declaration)
  - [Standard library in C++: `<string>`](#standard-library-in-c-string)
    - [Defining a string](#defining-a-string)
    - [Concatenating two strings](#concatenating-two-strings)
    - [Contains function](#contains-function)
  - [Passing `std::string` to a function](#passing-stdstring-to-a-function)
  - [Further reading/links](#further-readinglinks)

## Related Videos
- [Pointers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DTxHyVn0ODg&t=0s)
- [Arrays](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ENDaJi08jCU&t=0s)

## Notes

A string is an array (a collection) of characters.

## Characters (Chars)
Characters are different symbols/letters/... that are represented in various forms.

**Note:** A `char` (short for character) is 1 byte long and thus it is useful for byte arithmetics or allocating a specific amount of bytes.

### Different UTF encodings
UTF-16/32 encoding is used for handling languages that need more than 256 different characters/symbols.

UTF-8:
```
1 char = 1 byte = 8 bit
=> 256 different symbols/letters/... can be represented
```

UTF-16:
```
2 chars = 2 bytes = 16 bit
=> 65.536 different symbols/letters/... can be represented
```

**Note:** The baseline language in C++ is English (which can be represented in UTF-8) so the primitive datatype `char` is one byte and thus a normal string consists of 1 byte characters.

## How Strings work basically
### String declaration without library

```c++
const char* name = "Cherno";
```
- Strings are immutable because `name` is a fixed block of memory
- For increasing the string a new allocation (and deletion of the old string) is needed
- `"Cherno"` in memory looks like: `43 68 65 72 6e 6f 00` (the last `00` is the "null termination character")
  - length of the string is not known because `const char* name` is a pointer
    - that's why we need a "stop sign", at which the program stops reading the string
  - string begins at the pointer and continues until this null termination character

### Manual string declaration
```c++
char name[7]={'C','h','e','r','n','o',0};
```
- here the null termination character needs to be set manually 

**Rule of thumb:** If you don't use the `new` keyword, don't use the `delete` keyword.

```c++
char name[] = "Cherno";
name[2]='a';
// expected result: "Charno"
```

**Note:** Characters are defined in single quotes (`''`). If something is defined by double quotes (`""`), it automatically becomes a char pointer (`char*`) - not a string.


## Standard string library in C++: `<string>`
- `std::string` works on char arrays and has functions to manipulate them
- `#include <string>` is needed (iostream has a definition to string but for printing strings to console `<string>` is needed)
  - the operation `std::cout <<` needs to be overloaded to accept strings as well and this overloading is done in the `<string>` header (which is included by `#include <string>`)
- `string` has a constructor that takes a `char*` or a `const char*` as parameter

### Defining a string
```c++
std::string name="Cherno";
```
### Concatenating two strings
The following won't work,
```c++
std::string name="Cherno"+" hello!";
```
because the two `strings` are two const char arrays or two pointers and thus can't be added.
Instead of this the following would work
```c++
std::string name="Cherno";
name+=" hello!";
```
because now we are adding a pointer to a string and `+=` is overloaded in the string class to let us do that. 

This can be combined in one line of code:
```c++
std::string name=std::string("Cherno")+" hello!";
```

### Contains function
```c++
boolean contains = name.find("no") != std::string::npos;
```
`name.find("no")` 
- returns the position of the first character of the match if `"no"` was found in `name` 
- returns `std::string::npos` if `"no"` was not found in `name` 

**Note:** `std::string::npos` is a constant (of value -1) and is returned by `std::string.find(str)` if `str` is not found 

## Passing `std::string` to a function
**Don't do** this
```c++
void printString(std::string str){
    std::cout<<str<<std::endl;
}
```
because the function `printString(str)` will create a new copy of `str` which is very slow.

**Do this** instead
```c++
void printString(std::string& str){
    std::cout<<str<<std::endl;
}
```
because passing a string by reference is much faster and passing it additionally as `const` reference avoids changing it inside the function (if the function is wanted as read only function).

## Further reading/links
- [`std::string` API reference](https://cplusplus.com/reference/string/string/)













