# String Literals in C++

This chapter covers the contents of the depending [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FeHZHF0f2dw&list=PLlrATfBNZ98dudnM48yfGUldqGD0S4FFb&index=32).

## Table of Contents
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Related Videos](#related-videos)
  - [Notes](#notes)
  - [Different types of `char`s](#different-types-of-chars)
  - [Different types of `string`s](#different-types-of-strings)
  - [Prepend the `R` to `char`s](#prepend-the-r-to-chars)
  - [Using `string_literals`](#using-string_literals)

## Related Videos
- [How Strings Work in C++ (and how to use them)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ijIxcB9qjaU&list=PLlrATfBNZ98dudnM48yfGUldqGD0S4FFb&index=31)

## Notes
A string literal is a series of characters in between two double quotes (`""`).

The standard C library is `<stdlib.h>` and is included by `#include <stdlib.h>`.

An escaping character `\0` counts as one character:
> Escape sequences are used to represent certain special characters within string literals and character literals. [(cppreference)](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/escape)

A `\0` in the middle of a string could crash the expected behavior.
```c++
const char name[8]="Che\0rno";
std::cout << Length of name: << strlen(name) << std::endl;
```
The above code snippet outputs
```
Length of name: 3
```
because the reading of the string is terminated at the `\0` in `Che\0rno`.

Whereas if we remove the `\0` the output is
```
Length of name: 6
```

Basically we can use a `const char*` for defining the variable:
```c++
const char* name="Cherno";
```
Here again the `const` keyword guarantees that the variable `name` can't be modified.

**Warning:** Don't use
```c++
char* name="Cherno";
name[2]='a';
```
because it's undefined behavior. The reason for this is, that the above code is a pointer to a string literal and string literals are stored in a read-only section of the memory.

**Note:** Undefined behavior is, when the C++ standard doesn't define what should happen in this case. Some compilers might work well, while others won't work as expected.

If you want to change the characters of the string you could use 
```c++
char name[]="Cherno";
name[2]='a';
```
This works because the compiler creates a new variable and edits this one, whereas in the previous example we tried to modify the pointer or the data where the pointer points to (and because this data is stored in the read-only section it's not possible). 

## Different types of `char`s
1 byte per character (made with UTF-8):
```c++
const char* name="Cherno";
```
2 bytes per character:
```c++
const wchar_t* name=L"Cherno";
```
**Note:** The `wchar_t` character is 2 bytes on windows and 4 on linux/mac. It's up to the compiler to decide the size of the character.

2 bytes (16 bits) per character (made with UTF-16):
```c++
const char16_t* name=u"Cherno";
```

4 bytes (32 bits) per charater (made with UTF-32):
```c++
const char32_t* name=U"Cherno";
```

## Different types of `string`s
According to the different types of `char`s we can declare different types of `string`s

`wstring`
```c++
std::wstring name=L"Cherno";
```

`u16string`
```c++
std::u16string name=u"Cherno";
```

`u32string`
```c++
std::u32string name=U"Cherno";
```

## Prepend the `R` to `char`s
Use the `R` prefix
```c++
const char* name=R"(Line1
Line2
Line3)";
```
to ignore escape characters.

## Using `string_literals`
For concatenating two strings instead of the solution in [chapter 31](31.md#concatenating-two-strings) you can use `string_literals`:
```c++
using namespace std::string_literals;
std::string name="Cherno"s + " hello";
```

